(atmospheric electronic music)
(atmospheric music)
Hi, I'm Peter Russell
and all my life I've been fascinated by science
and the discoveries it is making about the world.
But the one thing that science hasn't been able to explain
is the very fact that we are conscious.
That we each have an inner-world of experience.
It's easier to explain how life evolved from simple cells
into human beings than it is to explain
why any of us ever has a single conscious thought.
And yet the very fact that we are conscious
is the one thing we cannot deny.
This is the great mystery of consciousness.
Why do we have this capacity for inner-experience?
And it's not just human beings that have it.
I often hear scientists say that animals aren't conscious,
but is that really so?
When I see a dog lying on the floor asleep
and its legs are twitching and its nose is quivering,
I imagine it's dreaming and if it's dreaming
it's having an experience.
And also, why else would be bother giving our pets
anesthetics when we operate
if we didn't believe they were conscious?
Why would we want to make them unconscious?
The difference with humans beings is that
we know that we know.
We are conscious that we are conscious.
Now one way of thinking about consciousness
is to liken it to the light inside a film projector.
(film reel rapidly clicking)
(atmospheric music)
At the heart of the projector is a sort of white light
and the light shines through the film and takes on
the colors and forms of the film
and then an image appears on the screen.
Now what we're actually seeing is just shaped light
but we get so engrossed in the movie,
the stories, the feelings we're having, the sadness,
the horror, the excitement,
that we forget it's all just a form
that light has taken on.
A similar process happens in the mind.
All I ever actually experience are the images
appearing in my consciousness.
But it doesn't seem that way.
When I see a tree, it looks as if I'm seeing
the tree directly.
But science tells me something completely
different is happening.
Light enters the eye where it's absorbed by the retina
and it triggers electrical impulses
which travel down nerve fibers to the brain.
The brain then analyzes the data and from that
create its own picture of the world.
I then have the experience of seeing a tree.
What I'm actually seeing is not the tree itself
but the image of a tree that appears in my mind
and this is true of everything I experience.
Every sound, color, sensation,
taste, smell, memory, thought,
they're all just images appearing in my mind.
It's all forms that consciousness is taking on.
(atmospheric music)
But where does consciousness itself come from?
This is the great mystery.
It may be that one day we'll understand the brain so well
that we know the exact physical processes that go on
when we have the experience of seeing a tree,
but even when we do, the question still remains
of why is there consciousness in the first place?
Why doesn't all this brain activity go on in the dark?
This is what philosophers call
"The hard problem of consciousness."
How is it that something as unconscious
as the matter of the brain, can ever give rise to something
as immaterial as an experience?
I think it's not actually a hard problem,
so much as an impossible problem.
Impossible within the current paradigm.
(atmospheric music)
In some ways we're like the medieval astronomers
who were locked into the view that the Earth
was the center of the Universe
with the Sun, Moon and stars orbiting around it.
But there was a problem with this view.
The planets did not move smoothly through the sky.
The wandered back and forth amongst the other stars.
The medieval astronomers tried to explain the peculiar
movement of the planets
with increasingly complex systems of orbits,
but nothing seemed to work.
When Copernicus came along
and suggested the Earth might be spinning around the Sun,
no one took him seriously.
And when Galileo found evidence to support Copernicus,
the bishops refused to look through his telescope
knowing it could not be true.
It was only 100-years later when Sir Isaac Newton
did the math and proved the new view was correct
that the paradigm was finally established.
Today we're in a similar position regarding consciousness.
We are locked into the view that consciousness itself
is somehow created by the brain
and people have tried various ways to explain this.
Some think it's to do with the processing
over the brain as a whole,
some think it's to do with quantum effects
inside nerve cells, but try as they may,
no one has succeeded in explaining
how any purely material process could ever give rise
to an experience in the mind.
We're rather like the medieval astronomers
who never questioned their basic assumption.
And what is our basic assumption today?
It is that matter is not conscious.
That matter is totally devoid of the capacity
for experience.
(zapping)
(atmospheric music)
An alternative assumption, and one that's been taken
seriously by a growing number of people
is that the capacity for experience is present
to some degree in everything.
Awareness itself isn't something
that's created by the brain.
It doesn't suddenly appear as if by magic out of nowhere
once a particular arrangement of the nervous system
has evolved.
The capacity for experience is there all along.
Now this isn't actually such a new idea.
We find it's a common theme in Eastern philosophy,
many Western philosophers have explored it,
but it's never been taken seriously by Western science.
What happens if we do take it seriously?
It turns out it doesn't really change anything in science.
Mathematics is still the same.
The laws of physics all hold true.
Chemistry, biology,
everything we've discovered there is the same.
What it changes is our view of ourselves
and our place in the Cosmos.
It puts consciousness right back at the center of things.
In this view, consciousness is not limited to creatures
with nervous systems.
Even a simple bacterium has a faint glimmer of awareness.
Nothing like the rich experience we know.
Nothing like a thought or a feeling.
Perhaps just the faintest sense of warmth or light.
If numbers could be put to it,
maybe a billionth of human consciousness,
but not nothing at all.
As life became more complex,
also its experience of the world became more complex.
When it developed sensory systems, it was able to take in
more information from the world.
And then later as it developed nervous systems,
it was able to process that information
and get a better picture of the world around.
So the image that appeared in consciousness
got richer and more detailed
and then with human beings,
evolution took another step forward
because we not only see the world
and hear the world in all its incredible detail,
we can also think about our experience.
We can reflect upon it.
And we can also then begin to reflect upon ourselves
and the fact that we are experiencing,
and we notice that we are conscious.
We become conscious of consciousness itself.
And this is the next great step that we've made.
We have made the step into self-awareness.
(atmospheric music)
(moody electronic music)
With self-awareness came a sense of a self.
Of an 'I' that is aware.
But what exactly is the self?
This feeling of 'I' that we all know so well.
This is the second great mystery of consciousness.
We use the world 'I' so much,
you'd think we knew what we meant by it.
But as soon as you try to define this thing we call 'I',
you run into problems.
Who am I?
How do I define myself?
Peter Russell?
That's just my name.
A writer?
That's an activity from my past.
A man?
I have a male body,
but I can imagine myself in a female body.
I might have different perceptions, feelings and values,
but the 'I' that has them would be the same.
It's that same sense of 'I' that has been there all my life.
What is this 'I' that is always there?
To know what the self really is,
we need to carefully observe our own consciousness.
This is the path that many spiritual seekers have explored.
They've looked deep within their own minds
trying to find the essence of self
and they all come up with the same answer.
There's nothing there.
No thing we can call the self.
This sense of a unique, separate, individual self
turns out to be an illusion,
albeit a very convincing illusion.
This feeling we call 'I' is just the feeling
of being conscious.
Many experience it as simply a sense of being.
But because we don't normally recognize that what we are
is this inner-quality of being,
we keep looking for some thing we can call the self
and so we dress ourselves up in all these
psychological clothes.
Things like the roles we play in life.
The way people see us, the things we do.
Our personality, our character.
But these are all images of the self, they're not
the self in its true essence.
It's almost like the opposite to the Emperor
having no clothes, in this case there's lots of clothes
but no Emperor underneath.
If we imagine ourselves to be the various ideas we have
of the self then our sense of identity
is always at the mercy of events in the world.
If our circumstances change, if our roles change,
if the way people see us changes,
then our very sense of identity can be threatened.
And as a result of this we spend a lot of time and energy
trying to fend off threats to our identity,
trying to bolster our self-image,
buying things we don't really need.
Trying to be someone.
On the other hand, when we discover what we really are,
when we discover this sense of being
that's always underneath,
there comes a sense of liberation.
There's the realization that we don't need to do anything
in order to be anybody.
And with that the mind relaxes.
There's a sense of deep relief.
Underlying everything we do in life,
everything we're looking for, everything we're chasing,
there's one common desire, one universal purpose
and that is, we want to feel better.
We want to feel more satisfied,
more fulfilled, more at ease.
None of us wants to be in pain or suffereing.
We want to avoid that if we can.
We all want to feel happier, have more joy in life.
What this ultimately means is that
what we're really for is not things so much as
a better state of mind.
A more satisfying state of consciousness.
This is the mind's bottom line.
As the Dalai Lama put it,
"In the final analysis, the hope of every person
"is simply peace of mind."
There's nothing wrong with this.
It's completely natural.
Where we go wrong is in the ways we go about
finding peace of mind.
Welcome to Beverly Hills, you have arrived!
So we chase after wealth, possession,
fashion and fame in the hope that if we
just got enough we'd finally be happy.
Now sometimes we do find what we're looking for,
and we do feel happy again,
but it's not a happiness which lasts.
So we start looking for something else
to make us feel better.
Many of us spend our whole lives just looking.
Yet the truth is, it isn't having the right things
or experiences that makes us happy.
When we examine our minds closely,
we find the very opposite.
When we think there's something missing,
something we need in order to be happy,
we create for ourselves a feeling of discontent.
This I often think is the sad joke about human beings.
We're so busy worrying
about whether or not we're gonna be at peace in the future,
we never allow ourselves to be at peace
in the present moment.
(relaxed music)
How can we be more in the present?
In itself it's quite simple.
It's just a matter of relaxing the attention
and opening our awareness
to what we're actually experiencing.
Just noticing the actual sensations in your body.
Flowing of the breaths.
Feeling in the hands.
Just noticing what is, as it is,
without thinking about it.
Our experience of the body is always
in the present moment.
It's our thinking about it that takes us
out of the present.
The mind's been so deeply ingrained to think about
what's going on that very easily it jumps in
and off again on some train of thought.
When you realize that has happened,
just simply relax the attention again
and once more become aware of what is actually happening
in the present moment.
The practice itself is simple.
Like any other practice.
(piano notes)
It's just a matter of repeating the process again and again
and gradually it gets easier and easier.
The world's spiritual traditions
appear on the surface to be very different.
They have different views on the origin of life,
or our place in the Universe,
or what happens to us when we die.
Some believe in a supreme being.
Some believe in many deities.
Others don't talk of God at all.
But they do have some common underlying themes.
They all see that we get caught in attitudes
and beliefs that don't serve us well.
That lead you to behave in ways that are harmful to others,
and often, not even in our own best interests.
Each spiritual tradition seeks in its own way,
some through prayer, meditation, or devotion,
to open to the inner-world of the mind.
The world of the spirit.
They want to liberate our souls.
To free our minds from self-centered attitudes
and materialist attachments
by urging us to discover who and what we really are.
In one way or another they are talking about
a shift in consciousness.
Consider what happens when we find ourselves
stuck in a traffic jam.
(car horns)
A traffic jam only has the power to stop the traffic.
It does not inject adrenaline into your bloodstream.
If you're feeling upset, it's because the voice in your head
is telling you that you're gonna be late,
and if you're late bad things may happen.
You may miss the meeting, you may be late home.
It's this that's making you upset.
The fear that you will not be happy sometime in the future.
(atmospheric music)
Western science has been remarkably successful
with explaining the world around us,
but it hasn't given us meaning.
The world it describes is a dry, material world
without any real purpose.
And science has also given us an abundance
of technologies which we've used
to satisfy many of our needs and desires.
But again, it hasn't given us values.
It doesn't tell us the best way to use
this incredible knowledge and power.
It also hasn't really helped us develop inwardly.
If anything, it's reinforced our sense of self-centeredness.
We're probably more full of ourselves today
than we've ever been.
I think what we need today is an integration
of our scientific understanding of the world
with the wisdom that's held in the world's
spiritual traditions.
The origins of consciousness may remain a mystery
but how to awaken our consciousness,
how to free ourselves from misguided attitudes and values,
to discover who and what we really are,
that is not a mystery.
That's something that's been explored by
spiritual teachers from the around the world.
People who've gone deep within their own minds
and discovered the true nature of consciousness
and from that, how to live
with joy and love in their hearts,
and that's what we need today.
We need to rediscover that wisdom for ourselves.
(atmospheric electronic music)
The next great frontier
is not outer space,
it's inner-space.
Research into the nature of consciousness itself.
The one thing we all know for sure
and the one thing we've not yet explored.
(moody electronic music)